Probabilistic Machine
Learning for Healthcare
Irene Y. Chen,1,∗Shalmali Joshi,2,∗Marzyeh
Ghassemi,2,3 and Rajesh Ranganath4,5,6
1Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA; email: iychen@mit.edu
2Vector Institute, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; email: shalmali@vectorinstitute.ai
3Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada
4Department of Computer Science, Courant Institute, New York University, New
York, New York 10012, USA
5Center for Data Science, New York University, New York, New York 10012, USA
6Department of Population Health, New York University Grossman School of
Medicine, New York, New York 10012, USA
Xxxx. Xxx. Xxx. Xxx. 2021. AA:1–25
https://doi.org/10.1146/((please add
article doi))
Copyright c
⃝2021 by Annual Reviews.
All rights reserved
Keywords
probabilistic modeling, health, electronic health records
Abstract
Machine learning can be used to make sense of healthcare data. Proba-
bilistic machine learning models help provide a complete picture of ob-
served data in healthcare. In this review, we examine how probabilistic
machine learning can advance healthcare. We consider challenges in
the predictive model building pipeline where probabilistic models can
be beneﬁcial including calibration and missing data. Beyond predictive
models, we also investigate the utility of probabilistic machine learning
models in phenotyping, in generative models for clinical use cases, and
in reinforcement learning.
1
arXiv:2009.11087v1  [stat.ML]  23 Sep 2020

Contents
1. INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................
2
2. PROBABILISTIC MODELS .................................................................................
3
3. CHALLENGES IN BUILDING PREDICTIVE MODELS FOR MEDICINE ..................................
4
3.1. Missing Values ..........................................................................................
4
3.2. Censoring ................................................................................................
5
3.3. Calibration...............................................................................................
6
3.4. Uncertainty ..............................................................................................
7
3.5. Data Shift ...............................................................................................
8
3.6. Fairness..................................................................................................
10
4. PHENOTYPING WITH LATENT VARIABLES .............................................................
11
4.1. Phenotypic Matching ...................................................................................
12
4.2. Uncovering Hidden Phenotypes .........................................................................
12
4.3. Semi-supervised Phenotyping with Anchors ............................................................
13
5. GENERATIVE MODELS.....................................................................................
13
6. REINFORCEMENT LEARNING FOR TREATMENT PLANNING .........................................
15
6.1. Model-based RL .........................................................................................
16
6.2. Stochastic Policies ......................................................................................
16
6.3. Partial Observability.....................................................................................
17
7. DISCUSSION.................................................................................................
18
1. INTRODUCTION
Recent advances in healthcare—from tracking patient health with mobile phones (1), to
predicting peripheral vascular disease from retinal images (2), to detecting sepsis early in
intensive care units (3), to summarizing medical records to reduce the digital burden on
clinicians (4)—have made use of artiﬁcial intelligence and machine learning. The power of
machine learning is rooted in both the assumptions encoded in a model and the troves of
healthcare data used for training.
Abstractly, healthcare data can be thought of as coming from a probability distribution
called the data generating distribution.
It is through this data generating distribution
that learning and evaluating a machine learning model can be formalized. For example,
the error of a machine learning model on a test set, i.e., data that is not used during
training, measures how well this model performs on new samples from the data generating
distribution. In many uses of machine learning models in healthcare, the data generating
distribution does not need to be made explicit. For instance, making predictions or ﬁnding
regression coeﬃcients may not require consideration of the data generating distribution.
We illustrate why a probabilistic machine learning model is helpful in healthcare. Imag-
ine modeling the survival time for melanoma patients based on stage and demographic in-
formation. If two observed stage, demographic pairs have the same average survival time,
but the variance in survival diﬀers, the average survival time can mislead planning.
A
probabilistic model of survival would instead provide a more holistic view by returning a
distribution over survival times given the stage and demographic information. Such a prob-
abilistic model would enable both the patient and the provider to better plan for the future
by incorporating uncertainty into the decision making process.
For example, a melanoma
Probability
distribution:
Function describing
the random process
of possible outcomes,
denoted p(·)
Data generating
distribution: The
probability
distribution from
which observations
are sampled
Machine learning
model: An algorithm
that has been
trained on data for a
task
Algorithm: A ﬁnite
sequence of
well-deﬁned
instructions used to
solve a class of
problems
patient with high certainty about a small survival time might choose to make speciﬁc life
2
Chen et al.

adjustments.
The probabilistic perspective can aid the entire machine learning model development
and maintenance pipeline. Missing values can be molliﬁed by probabilistic models. Cen-
soring of labels, such as survival time, can be addressed through probabilistic models. The
probabilistic view can also aid in maintaining deployed models by detecting shifts in a data
generating distribution over time.
Probabilistic machine learning models have a myriad of practical uses in healthcare. A
type of probabilistic model called a latent variable models can be used for phenotpying.
Probabilistic models can also be used for simulation, which has seen success in scientiﬁc
discovery like in drug development (5).
The probabilistic approach has shown promise
in learning policies for diabetes and sepsis management, among other applications that
use reinforcement learning (6, 7). However, estimating probabilistic models comes with a
cost.
Probabilistic models can require more mental and computational labor than non-
probabilistic approaches, though this labor is being reduced through the introduction of
probabilistic building blocks in common machine learning toolkits (8, 9).
This review focuses on the uses of probabilistic models in healthcare. At the end of this
review, the goal is for the reader to understand how probability plays a role in building
models and how it can help address challenges that occur in machine learning models in
healthcare. This review is organized as follows. The ﬁrst section sets up mathematical
notation for the basic concepts around probabilistic models. The subsequent sections are
organized by use cases in healthcare that make use of the probabilistic perspective.
2. PROBABILISTIC MODELS
To make the distinction between a probabilistic model and a deterministic model clear, we
present an example. Consider features x and a count-valued response y like lymphocyte
count. Now take a model with parameter θ denoted gθ(x); this model is a function that
predicts lymphocyte count based on the features and can be learned by ﬁnding the pa-
rameters that minimize the squared error between the model predictions and the observed
response. For simplicity we do not consider a ﬁxed data set, but rather assume access to
the data generating distribution F. See margin notes for common notation used in this
review, including response, probability, and expectation. With this setup, the model gθ(x)
can be trained by ﬁnding θ to minimize
Ex,y∼F [(gθ(x) −y)2].
If trained well, the model gθ will be close to the expected value of y given the observed fea-
tures x. This type of model is deterministic and can be used to make predictions. However,
without assumptions, this model says nothing about the distribution of the response.
A probabilistic model represents a probability distribution. A probabilistic model of a
response y given features x, rather than being a function, would be a probability distribution
pθ(y | x). One way to train such a model from data is to maximize the likelihood of the
observations,
Ex,y∼F [log pθ(y | x)].
If trained well, the model pθ would be close to the conditional distribution of y given the
features x in the data generating distribution. The probabilistic model pθ can not only be
Response/label:
Dependent variable,
e.g. patient
mortality, denoted y
Feature:
Independent
variable, e.g. patient
biomarkers, denoted
x
Parameter: Model
parameters, e.g.
coeﬃcients of a
logistic regression,
denoted θ
Expectation:
Expectation with
random variables
drawn from the
distribution F,
denoted Ex,y∼F
www.annualreviews.org • Probabilistic machine learning for Healthcare
3

used to compute the average value of y given a particular observed feature (by computing
Epθ(y | x)[y]), but also the conditional variance and other statistics as well. Note that binary
classiﬁers are special in that their probability distribution is completely characterized by
its expectation.1
Probabilistic models go beyond regression.
We list diﬀerent ﬂavors of probabilistic
models—predictive models, generative models, and latent variable models—in the margin
notes. Probabilistic models can refer to both models with probabilistic outputs or proba-
bilistic modeling components in a broader estimation pipeline. In the subsequent sections,
we will go into more detail on the role of probabilistic models in healthcare for building
predictive models (Section 3), for phentopying (Section 4), for simulation (Section 5), and
for sequential decision making (Section 6).
Predictive model: A
model for a response
given observed
features, denoted
p(y | x)
Latent variable
model: A model that
connects unseen
traits to observed
data, denoted p(z, x)
Generative model: A
model that outputs
samples, denoted
p(x)
3. CHALLENGES IN BUILDING PREDICTIVE MODELS FOR MEDICINE
In this section, we show how probabilistic models can aid in diﬀerent parts of the model
development and model maintenance pipeline in healthcare.
Here, we assume that the
problem has already been reduced to a collection of features and a (potentially real-valued)
response. The goal is to produce a model that predicts the response from the features.
The section highlights probabilistic methods—referring to both models with probabilistic
outputs or models with probabilistic computation in the development pipeline–to address
key challenges in building predictive models for medicine.
3.1. Missing Values
Missing values are a prevalent problem in clinical data that can impede predictive models,
and probabilistic models allow for the modeling of the underlying data mechanism for
missingness. Healthcare datasets are generally observational and frequently incomplete as
a result. Consider a longitudinal clinical dataset of patient visits following a diagnosis of
diabetes. For each patient visit, a clinician may choose not to measure all possible biomarker
values, resulting in missing values.
Patients may also vary in their number of clinical
visits, resulting in missing visits for some patients compared to the maximum number of
patient visits. Traditionally, machine learning models require completely observed datasets.
Because removal of missing values may result in a dataset that is too small, or the removal
may induce statistical bias, the search for other methods to accommodate missingness is an
active area of research.
Missingness: The
manner in which
data is missing from
a sample of the
population
In cases where predictive performance is of greatest importance, the model can directly
incorporate missingness. One example might be passing indicators of observation as fea-
tures, which provide the most information about the response (10). Using these indicators
of observation in a time series, recurrent neural networks have been used to predict pa-
tient outcomes in the intensive care unit (11). Additionally, deep probabilistic models can
marginalize missing values to predict time to coronary heart disease (12).
The predictive performance may not be the only quantity of interest for a model. Re-
searchers may also be interested in parameter estimation, e.g., using coeﬃcients to model
features importance. A main method to address missing data for parameter estimation
is imputation, meaning the replacement of missing values based on information from the
1In general, binary classiﬁers can be used to approximate more complex distributions.
4
Chen et al.

observed values. After imputation, the transformed data is used for the resulting predictive
model. Imputation methods range from using the mean or median of the observed values
to prediction of the missing value for each observation. One popular imputation method is
multiple imputation using chained equations where missing features are imputed using the
posterior predictive distribution of the missing data conditional on the observed data (13).
Imputation: The
replacement of
missing values based
on information from
the observed values
Implicit in imputation methods is an assumption about the underlying data generating
process (14), namely that the data is either missing completely at random (MCAR) or
missing at random (MAR). MCAR refers an assumption that the missingness of a data
is completely random and uncorrelated whereas MAR refers to missingness of data that
depends on the observed data. Notably, imputation methods cannot support data that is
missing not at random (MNAR), meaning the missingness correlates with an unobserved
characteristic. Using either the assumption of MCAR or MAR, imputation methods range
can leverage probabilistic methods such as Gaussian methods (15), causal diagrams (16),
or models using auxiliary information (17).
Identiﬁcation of MNAR requires additional
assumptions, for example semi-parametric estimation using an instrumental variable (18).
Additionally, modeling the data missingness process allows for the model stability when the
mechanism for data missingness changes, e.g. across hospitals or across time.
3.2. Censoring
Similar to how probabilistic models can address missing features as described in Section 3.1,
probabilistic models can capture the probability distribution of the possible outcome events
when the patient labels are not observed. Labels in healthcare often depend on a patient’s
state at some point in the future. This gap in time between observed features and observed
label means that the labels may be unobserved or censored for some patients (19). We may
be interested in the time to event, e.g., death, for a patient given observed features and
may observe previous patients, only some of whom have observed times to event. A simple
machine learning method might regress on the time to event only for patients with observed
labels, but this simpliﬁcation generally underestimates the time to event because patients
with a longer gap between observed features and time to event are less likely to be observed.
In contrast, probabilistic models to characterize the survival function are trained with the
label likelihood and can directly address censored observations by computing the probability
that the observed label falls in the censoring interval through integration when observations
are censored at random.
The general assumption that makes survival problems tractable
Censoring: The
process through
which event times
hidden
Survival function: A
function providing a
probabilistic
estimate of no event
occurring before a
speciﬁed time
is censoring at random where the censoring and event time are independent given the
observed features. Under the censoring at random assumption, consider a patient that has
no event until a censoring time c with features x, the likelihood under a distribution p can
be computed as
R ∞
c
p(a | x) da.
This approach has been used in combination with deep
neural networks in recent work on deep survival analysis (10, 20, 12, 21).
The evaluation of a survival function requires consideration about the probability dis-
tribution of outcomes. The Brier score (22) is the metric traditionally used for estimating
the survival function. Evaluation with the Brier score requires appropriate adjustment for
censoring by estimating the (inverse) probability of censoring. Non-probabilistic methods
like survival forests (23) have also been used to incorporate right censoring. Survival forests
side-step explicit parametrization of censoring mechanism but build on ensembles of random
trees to non-parametrically estimate a cumulative hazard function (a probabilistic quantity)
using the NelsonAalen estimator (24). In the presence of more complex forms of censoring,
www.annualreviews.org • Probabilistic machine learning for Healthcare
5

like interval censoring which is common in epidemiological studies, uncertainty over the
interval of censoring should be modeled to ﬁx bias in survival estimates. This statistical
bias is particularly problematic if the interval periods themselves are long. Modeling the
uncertainties over the censoring mechanism have been demonstrated to improve estimation
over imputation techniques (25) and has been only recently explored in machine learning
literature (26) in a non-probabilistic framework using random forests.
3.3. Calibration
Probabilistic machine learning models can ensure that risk scores used in clinical settings
are calibrated, meaning that the risk estimates accurately characterize the actual risk. Risk
scores like the Framingham risk score (27) for cardiovascular disease prediction are routinely
used for clinical decision making, diagnostic tools, or determining subsequent treatment
pathways. There is a general expectation that in addition to predicting the correct binary
label y (whether a patient will develop coronary heart disease in 10 years), the actual
risk estimate of the event is available as well. These risk estimates can be obtained only
from a machine learning model that frames the supervised learning problem as that of
estimating the probability pθ(y | x). Therefore, support vector machines (SVMs) will not
directly provide such risk estimates without further processing.
Calibration: The
measure of how well
risk estimates reﬂect
true risk
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Conﬁdence (ˆp)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Accuracy (of samples with conﬁdence ˆp)
Calibration plots (Reliability diagram)
Perfectly calibrated
Logistic Regression
Figure 1
Calibration of an machine learning model can be
measured via probabilistic modeling. A model is
well-calibrated if for all examples, c, for which
the model provides the same estimate ˆp of
p(y | x), the proportion of these examples that
are associated with the prediction (y = 1) is
equal to ˆp. In this ﬁgure the red shaded region
denotes the reliability plot of a perfectly
calibrated model and the blue shaded region
from a logistic regression ﬁtted for a synthetic
binary classiﬁcation problem.
How well do machine learning mod-
els trained to estimate pθ(y | x) character-
ize this risk? This can be understood by
quantifying how well-calibrated a model
is.
An machine learning method is well-
calibrated if for all examples, x, for which
the model provides the same estimate ˆp
of pθ(y | x), the proportion of these exam-
ples that are associated with the predic-
tion (y = 1) is equal to ˆp. Calibration is
therefore an inherently probabilistic con-
cept. While traditional machine learning
methods like logistic-regression and shal-
low neural networks typically produce well-
calibrated risk scores, modern neural net-
works notoriously may not (28). Further,
even if a model is calibrated at the popula-
tion level, subpopulation level miscalibra-
tion can further amplify inequities in clini-
cal decision making (29). Since calibration
signiﬁcantly aﬀects optimality of down-
stream clinical decision making (30), diag-
nostic, and other decision support models
should consider probabilistic frameworks
for supervised model design.
Calibration of machine learning models
can be quantiﬁed using reliability diagrams which evaluates the estimated risk of a group
of example ˆp against the expected sample accuracy for all ˆp. A well-calibrated model will
6
Chen et al.

be close to the identity function in the diagram (see Figure 1). Assessing the expected
(or maximum) diﬀerence between the estimated conﬁdence/risk of a model and empirical
estimates, a quantity known as the Expected (or Maximum) Calibration Error (31) can
summarize how well-calibrated a model is (lower is better). Reliability diagrams can also
be assessed at subpopulation levels to determine miscalibration challenges due to lack of
samples within groups. Calibration of machine learning methods can be improved post-
hoc using techniques such as Platt’s scaling (32), which corrects for calibration errors after
model training by learning a mapping from learned risk scores to calibrated risk scores by
estimating a sigmoid mapping on a validation set. These methods can also be used for non-
probabilistic models like SVMs that do not produce risk scores as a by-product of supervised
learning. Platt’s scaling is essentially reﬁtting a logistic regression (a probabilistic model)
to obtain risk scores from deterministic models like SVMs. When data is scarce, ﬂexible
non-parametric methods like isotonic regression can be used for calibration (33). Sigmoid
function reﬁtting as done in Platt’s scaling can also be extended to multiclass settings by
modeling multiclass problems as a one-vs-all classiﬁcation (34, 35). Calibration can also
be improved with other post-hoc methods. Binning methods to obtain calibrated neural
networks have also been proposed recently (36, 34).
This class of methods suitably re-
estimate risk scores to directly improve/optimize calibration metrics.
3.4. Uncertainty
Several types of uncertainties arise when modeling clinical outcomes of interest from ﬁnite
amount of data. Machine learning model predictions are based on a ﬁnite random samples,
making the model predictions themselves random. That is, any machine learning model
(deterministic or probabilistic) is a function of the random samples from the data generating
distribution and hence, has an associated uncertainty. The overall uncertainty of a machine
learning model prediction, captured by p(y | x) is known as the predictive uncertainty of
the model. To see how the uncertainty can aﬀect downstream decision making, consider a
breast cancer staging model that predicts risk of an adverse event. If the model-estimated
disease stage has diﬀerent variances for diﬀerent features values, the resulting decisions can
be suboptimal if a single decision threshold is used.
Predictive uncertainty can be further decomposed into diﬀerent sources.
The ﬁrst
source, called aleatoric uncertainty, measures the noise in the labels in the true data gen-
erating process. For instance, diagnostic labels can have some uncertainty when diﬀerent
clinicians annotate the same sample (37). The second source stems from the uncertainty
about an estimated model’s match to the true data generating distribution. This uncer-
tainty is called model uncertainty, also known as epistemic uncertainty. Model uncertainty
is a combination of the choice of the model class used to approximate a property of the
true data generating distribution, as well as the fact that multiple parameters θ within the
same model class can approximate the data well.
When a large enough sample size is available and assuming correctness of the model
class, uncertainty can be quantiﬁed using asymptotic analyses (38). Large scale datasets
may not always be available. In this case, uncertainty is either captured via bootstrapping
samples (39) without explicit probabilistic modeling or using a fully Bayesian framework.
Bootstrapping is a sampling with replacement procedure, a proxy to quantify uncertainty
Predictive
uncertainty: An
expression of the
statistical dispersion
of the model
prediction
Bootstrapping: A
procedure involving
sampling with
replacement, which
can be used to
quantify uncertainty
over a data sample
Bayesian framework:
A class of statistical
methods that assign
probabilities or
distributions to
events or parameters
based on prior
knowledge before
experimentation
over the data sample, so that multiple model estimates can be obtained. Predictions from
diﬀerent candidate models then give an estimate of variability in predictions, i.e., capturing
www.annualreviews.org • Probabilistic machine learning for Healthcare
7

uncertainty. Neural networks can also be retrained on bootstrapped samples to quantify
this uncertainty although performance may degrade with fewer data samples (40). These
methods can be used to assess overall uncertainty as well as calibration of a model, but still
only provide expectations over outcomes rather than a full characterization of the predictive
uncertainty. Thus, the onus is on the end user to calculate probabilistic quantities of interest
like variance that will be useful for downstream decision making.
In a full Bayesian framework, the outcome of interest is naturally modeled as a dis-
tribution i.e. p(y | x). Additionally, distributional assumptions are made over the model
parameter θ itself allowing to fully characterize as well as decompose the predictive distribu-
tion. The relationship between overall uncertainty and model uncertainty p(θ | D) (where
D is the dataset sample from the generating distribution) is captured by the following
relationship:
p(y | x) =
Z
θ
p(y | x, θ)p(θ | D)dθ
Notably, such uncertainty estimation via Bayesian modeling is more challenging to incor-
porate for non-probabilistic machine learning models like support vector machines. For deep
neural networks, for capturing this uncertainty over predictions, i.e. p(y | x), Bayesian deep
learning (41) is commonly employed. These methods usually capture intermediate uncer-
tainties i.e. over parameters p(θ | x) during model training. For instance, one method (42)
reinterprets traditional regularization methods like dropout regularization (42) in a prob-
abilistic framework. However, eliciting good prior distributions over parameters, required
for Bayesian modeling, can be a challenge for modern deep neural networks. Even in simple
models, misspeciﬁcation of such priors can lead to unreliable uncertainty estimates (43).
Recently, extensive evaluation of Bayesian neural networks and neural network ensemble
methods for uncertainty characterization has been demonstrated on critical care datasets
eICU and MIMIC-III (44).
Similar to bootstrapping neural network ensembles do not
explicitly model the predictive distribution to obtain uncertainty estimates.
In one ex-
ample, model predictions and hence downstream decisions can vary widely for individuals
due to these uncertainties and quantifying this uncertainty can reduce the possibility of
sub-optimal clinical decisions (44).
3.5. Data Shift
After clinical model development, the data setting in which the model is used may diﬀer
from the setting in which the model was trained, a shift that can be characterized and
accommodated by probabilistic models.
For example, model performance may degrade
when the data distribution for development and for deployment diﬀer across locations (45) or
across time (46). This shift of data can threaten the performance of machine learning models
in deployment. Consider a setting where a model is trained to predict an outcome y based
on patient features x. When a model is trained on a source domain with data distribution
p(y | x), the concern is that the setting of deployment may have a diﬀerent distribution in
p(x) (covariate shift) or p(y | x) (label shift), as seen in Figure 2. Probabilistic models can
describe this process and improve robustness of models over diﬀerent data distributions.
Covariate shift: The
condition where the
feature distribution
changes
Label shift: The
condition where the
relationship between
features and
response changes
Probabilistic models can address covariate shift through identiﬁcation and correction.
Covariate shift is the condition where the feature distribution changes. For example, urban
and rural hospitals have diﬀerences in clinical care patient populations. Rural hospitals have
higher prevalence of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease including higher rates of Medi-
8
Chen et al.

4
2
0
2
4
x
4
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
y
4
2
0
2
4
x
4
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
y
4
2
0
2
4
x
4
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
y
Figure 2
Consider a data distribution of p(x, y) (left) where x and y are continuous and univariate and
y = x + ϵ with ϵ ∼N(0, 1). Covariate shift (middle) refers to changes in p(x), for example
because of diﬀerences in patient demographics between hospitals. Here p(x) changes from a
unimodal distribution to a bimodal distribution. Label shift (right) refers to changes in the
relationship between x and y, for example because of diﬀerences in treatment policies between
hospitals. Here, we show y = −x + ϵ with ϵ ∼N(0, 1).
care hospitalizations and death (47). In model settings with long time-series sequences,
for example continuous monitoring in medical settings, change point detection identiﬁes
abrupt changes in observed data where p(x) shifts dramatically (48, 49). In settings with
clear and known demarcations between source and target domains, for example across hos-
pitals, probabilistic models can adapt model development on the source domain to a target
domain for deployment. One technique is using importance sampling, based on estimates of
the probability of the domain given the features, to reweight observed datapoints (50, 51).
Modeling and correcting for data shifts allows for more accurate and robust clinical models.
Label shift, meaning p(y | x) changes, is the mechanism of labels conditional on features
changes and may be due to changes in treatment policy or induced by the clinical model
itself (52). For example, clinical protocol for disease management may change as additional
scientiﬁc discoveries shape medical knowledge, resulting in multiple myeloma survival rates
improving dramatically with one-year relative survival rates increasing from 69% in 1973
to to 82% in 2013 due to better treatment policies (53). Without reasoning about this
shift, models may yield erroneous and outdated results. In one famous example, a model
predicting pneumonia risk stratiﬁcation did not account for patients with asthma being
given more severe interventions; the predictions for pneumonia patients with asthma yielded
lower risk when clinical literature reveals the opposite (54). In that case, models can be
trained to be anticipate shifts in policy based on the treatment policy distribution (55) and
therefore more readily update for changes in clinical treatment protocol.
Treatment policy: A
medical protocol for
interventions on a
given patient
Alternatively, the model itself may induce change in the data after deployment. For
example, a diagnostic model may yield predictions that guide treatment policy where high
risk patients receive more aggressive treatments, meaning the model may not be calibrated
to the outcomes that occur after model deployment. One method to address this shift is
to produce probabilistic models that yield stable and calibrated predictions for not only
pre-deployment outcomes but also against future outcomes that manifest from the data
shifts (56). Strategic behavior from the individuals may also aﬀect the data distribution,
for example, with otherwise healthy patients adapting to the deployed clinical model for
treatment and displaying behaviors similar to sick patients in order to receive additional
treatment. Causal inference methods can model complex systems to address changes in
www.annualreviews.org • Probabilistic machine learning for Healthcare
9

strategic behavior (57, 58).
3.6. Fairness
The fairness of a clinical model is a key concern to ensure unbiased predictions for medical
tasks, and probabilistic models help enable the deﬁning, auditing, and ameliorating this
algorithmic bias. Because of the high-stakes setting of healthcare, researchers have raised
numerous concerns about fairness and algorithmic bias in clinical contexts (59, 60, 61).
There exist many deﬁnitions of algorithmic fairness (62, 63, 64, 65), and probabilistic models
are crucial to representing and addressing many notions of ethics and disparity.
One branch of fairness focuses on the notion of individual fairness (63). This fairness
deﬁnition implies that a patient with similar characteristics to another patient should not
receive worse clinical care than the other. A key requirement is that similar patients receive
similar probabilistic predictions, using some notion of similarity (65).
Another branch of concerns analyzes fairness across groups. In this family of fairness
deﬁnitions, algorithmic bias is assessed based on known and pre-deﬁned sensitive attribute
groups, e.g. race, gender, socioeconomic status. Because some deﬁnitions are impossible to
satisfy simultaneously (66, 67), deﬁnition choice is crucial in diﬀerent health settings.
The fundamental idea across group fairness deﬁnitions is that a deﬁnition of performance
should not diﬀer across groups and statistically signiﬁcant violations of this assumption
could prove algorithmic bias.
Algorithmic fairness:
The study of
deﬁnitions related to
the justice of model
predictions
Individual fairness:
The principle that
similar individuals
should be treated
similarly
Fairness across
groups: The
principle that
pre-deﬁned patient
groups should
receive similar model
performance
Although not all deﬁnitions of group fairness require probabilistic models, we outline a
few examples of group fairness deﬁnitions that leverage the data distributions. For example,
the two groups may not adjust to changes in data shift in the same way. Probabilistic
models can learn models on the source data distribution that will adapt to a target data
distribution while satisfying group fairness deﬁnitions (68). In another example, examining
the calibration of an algorithm across each group may reveal larger disparities (69, 70), and
health settings may require calibration across multiple subgroups (71). Lastly, probabilistic
models can reason about regression on continuous outcome variables, for example in the
case of health care costs. When comparing predictions for healthcare costs between patients
with mental health and substance abuse disorders compared to patients without them, the
sensitive attribute group and the residual error from a learned model should be independent.
Researchers can then measure the covariance between the sensitive attribute group and the
residual error as a proxy for independence to detect the level of algorithmic bias in the
model (72).
The quest to propose solutions to algorithmic bias is still in its infancy.
Notably,
any balance between algorithmic fairness and accuracy may be ethically challenging for
health settings. Although non-probabilistic models solutions to algorithmic bias certainly
exist (60), probabilistic models consider how to ﬁx discrimination within the constraints
of the model. One method seeks to induce independence between model predictions and
the sensitive attribute through a latent representation can be learned that maximizes per-
formance and minimizes dependence on the sensitive attribute (64).
Another approach
alters the objective function of the predictive model to regularize for algorithmic fairness
based on a speciﬁed deﬁnitions (73, 74). Lastly, probabilistic models can reason about the
eﬀectiveness of additional data collection or other actions using the existing data (75).
10
Chen et al.

4. PHENOTYPING WITH LATENT VARIABLES
We now pivot to three major healthcare application areas where probabilistic modeling
has been extensively used, starting with phenotyping. Phenotyping (76) is the process of
producing concise representations of medical concepts or diagnoses composed of observable
clinical traits that could be used to facilitate cohort selection or trait deﬁnition (77). From
a latent variable perspective, we can hypothesize that simple latent “summaries” explain
the variation in observed patient records, and serve as a governing factor in determining
how diﬀerent patients will progress (78) or react to diﬀerent interventions (79). Prior work
has identiﬁed many forms of electronic phenotyping, including rule-based methods, text
processing, noisy data learning, and unsupervised discovery of latent phenotypes (80). We
categorize these eﬀorts into three settings, based primarily on the amount of the level of
label supervision used.
Phenotype: The
presentation of
characteristics of an
individual
In some settings the goal is phenotypic matching, where phenotypes are explicitly de-
ﬁned, and the goal is to map noisy data sources into these labels. In others the goal is
uncovering latent phenotypes, where there is uncertainty about what phenotypic deﬁnitions
should be, and the goal is to identify useful characterizations that could impact patient
care (81). Semi-supervised phenotyping is a hybrid approach that straddles matching and
discovery, where we assume that some label information is available, e.g., with the use
of speciﬁc “anchoring” clinical terms (82, 83). Both phenotypic matching and uncovering
latent phenotypes are visualized in Figure 3.
In this review, we review each of these
three settings—phenotype matching, uncovering latent phenotypes, and semi-supervised
phenotyping—outlining key areas where probabilistic models have made, or could make, an
impact.
Cardiovascular function
Renal Function
Low
High
Low
High
Systolic Blood Pressure
Cholesterol
Figure 3
Phenotyping matching (left) matches patients x with explicitly deﬁned phenotypes, here
described in diﬀerent shades of blue as having high/low cardiovascular function and high/low
renal function. Uncovering latent phenotypes (right) learns new phenotypes to identify useful
characterizations through probabilistic clustering.
www.annualreviews.org • Probabilistic machine learning for Healthcare
11

4.1. Phenotypic Matching
Phenotypic matching is a computational approach that involves matching or summarizing
patient records x into validated phenotypes z. This style of phenotyping is useful when a
meaningful classiﬁcation or alert could be automated for patients that need to be treated
early, or more eﬃciently.
For example, structured electronic health record (EHR) data
in the form of International Classiﬁcation of Disease (ICD) billing codes and medication
prescriptions have been used to detect coronary heart disease or rheumatoid arthritis (84).
More recent work has also targeted use of natural language processing (85), with additional
unsupervised learning of important features from the structured EHR (86). Importantly,
phenotypic matching assumes that the existing phenotype deﬁnitions z are appropriate,
robust and identiﬁable from the given data x.
Known challenges in label leakage, soft
labels, confounding and missingness must therefore be considered very carefully (87).
Probabilistic methods could be particularly useful in phenotyping due to the inherent
uncertainty in many phenotype deﬁnitions, which can change over time as in autism (88).
Some work has moved to integrate notions of uncertainty into matching, either by per-
forming large-scale phenotype estimation from observational data (89), or by visualizing
probabilistic estimates over phenotypes for interactive veriﬁcation (90). More generally,
models that attempt to discover phenotypes based on underlying data regularities, or use
prior labels in a semi-supervised fashion, are well-suited for probabilities modeling.
4.2. Uncovering Hidden Phenotypes
Instead of matching to a known phenotype z, many problems in healthcare require iden-
tifying potential phenotypes from data. When phenotypes are unknown, they are hidden.
This makes ﬁnding unknown phenotypes well-suited to latent variable models. This style
of model takes the phenotype of a person to be a latent variable z with a hypothesized
prior distribution p(z). The latent variable controls the distribution of the observed data
x through the likelihood p(x | z). As a whole, the model with parameters θ is pθ(z, x).
The goal during learning is to ﬁnd parameters of the latent variable model that make the
observed data likely.
Typically, this is done through an approximation to the posterior
p(z | x), which also helps compute phenotypes given an observation from a single patient.
To illustrate, imagine that x is a vector of measured traits like hemoglobin A1C—a test
that evaluates the average glucose in blood over the past few months, blood pressure—a
measure of the pressure that blood exerts within arteries, and cholesterol—a waxy sub-
stance that can develop into fatty deposits in blood vessels.
Let the phenotype z be a
binary variable marking a patient as belonging into one of two possible phenotypes. The
likelihood is set up such that the phenotype is encouraged to explain relationships between
the observed traits, e.g., blood pressure and cholesterol have a positive correlation.
One salient example of a latent variable model is a variational autoencoders (VAEs)
(91), where neural networks are both used to parametrize the likelihood and the posterior
approximation. Recent work has used VAEs in a health setting to create low-dimensional
latent representations of a phenotype feature space that additionally capture individual rates
of change along each dimension during aging (92). We note that non-probabilistic methods
have also identiﬁed meaningful subtypes including asthma subtypes through hierarchical
clustering (81) and type 2 diabetes through tensor factorization (93).
Uncovering latent phenotypes (and subcategories) often aims to discover similar patient
subgroups that may share the same underlying disease mechanism, or treatment response
12
Chen et al.

patterns. In conditions such as asthma, where there is heterogeneity in symptom expression
and response to therapy, phenotyping subcategories of z into z1 . . . zk can be particularly
useful. Data-driven methods for data-driven characterization of wheeze patterns, and the
further discovery of biomarkers to identify phenotypes are useful, particularly in childhood
(94, 95). Treatments themselves can also be heterogenous, and clustering them can reveal
treatment proﬁles at a large scale that would not have been clear in a smaller sample (96).
For example, recent work in endometriosis subtyping provides evidence of diﬀerent treat-
ments in each of four subtypes learned in an unsupervised mixed-membership model (97).
Importantly, while the subtypes present new knowledge, they also align well with pre-
vious clinical knowledge about endometriosis, and reﬂect direct patient experiences with
endometriosis.
Probabilistic clustering of time series speciﬁcally can be high-value in clinical settings,
because sequential clinical markers from diﬀerent patients could be heterogeonous.
For
instance, autoimmune diseases are known to be heterogenous, and hierarchical probabilistic
models can be used to infer disease subtypes in such patients and explain away correlations
that are not relevant to the question of interest (98). In more acute settings, neural networks
and switching state autoregressive models have been used in the intensive care unit to
predict upcoming interventions (99, 100). These estimations can be used to group patients
that are “maximally activiating” for intervention onsets (101).
4.3. Semi-supervised Phenotyping with Anchors
Phenotypic matching can initially be very labor intensive, as it requires many manual gold
standard annotations of z. In some cases, there is some strong information that can be used
for partial phenotype matching, but other facets of the phenotype must be discovered. One
potential solution to this is to assume that phenotype labels themselves are weak or “semi-
supervised”, with only a few known features from data being clear conditional markers. In
this setting, probabilistic modeling approaches can be used to identify additional features
that correlate with the anchoring clinical terms (82, 83). Anchoring can be thought of as
a form of noisy labelling, where observing the positive anchor ai unambiguously reveals
the state of latent phenotype zi to be positive, but a negative anchor ai reveals nothing
about zi, so that p(zi = 1 | ai = 1) = 1.
Other work has similarly used anchor words
Anchor: A speciﬁed
feature which, if
positive, reveal that
the desired attribute
is also positive
to provide a form of supervision in topic modeling for characterizing pancreatitis outcomes
(102).
Further work in phenotype inference with semi-supervised approaches have used
mixed membership models (103) to inferring binary labels for clinical condition targets
when trained on limited samples.
5. GENERATIVE MODELS
Generative models refer to the class of probabilistic models trained to produce samples that
match samples from the distribution from which observed data is collected. For example,
given data vector x, we can sample from p(x) using a generative model to produce synthetic
but realistic data, as shown in Figure 4. Recent advances in deep learning have led to
promising generative models. Generative adversarial networks (GANs) (104) use two neural
networks to ﬁrst create artiﬁcial imitations of the training data and then separately decide
whether a given sample was genuine or counterfeit. Other models include deep likelihood
models like normalizing ﬂows (105) where a simple initial density is transformed into a more
www.annualreviews.org • Probabilistic machine learning for Healthcare
13

complex one by applying a sequence of invertible transformations.
Sampling: The act of
generating data
points from a given
distribution
In this review, we focus on three promising cases for generative models in medicine.
First, we describe the the use of generative models to overcome data deﬁciency or ac-
cessibility challenges in clinical data.
Next, we describe how generative models can be
used for clinical tasks like abnormality detection and modality translation in medical imag-
ing. Lastly, we address the generation of viable candidates in the drug discovery process.
Figure 4
Generative models produce samples
from data distribution p(x). Synthetic
data samples (grey patients) resemble
actual patient data (green patients)
and are useful for many clinical
problems including data augmentation
and abnormality detection.
Data augmentation. Clinical predictive mod-
els often suﬀer from poor performance because of
insuﬃcient data stemming from patients with rare
conditions, labels that are costly to obtain, or other
logistical challenges. Data augmentation using gen-
erative models can create synthetic data that is sim-
ilar to the true dataset of interest to mitigate the
eﬀects of insuﬃcient data. Particularly in medical
imaging (106), generative models can then acceler-
ate model development that would be otherwise im-
peded by small dataset sizes.
Data augmentation can address small or imbal-
anced datasets through the generation of synthetic
datapoints. For example, GANs have been used to
augment all three classes of liver lesions (107), to in-
crease the number of positive examples of bone lesions (108) or brain metastases (109), and
to provide additional red blood cell images for downstream segmentation tasks (110). Note
that when data augmentation is applied to a dataset, the augmented data does add any
additional information, but the augmented data can regularize the model or help mitigate
class imbalance.
Data augmentation can address privacy and security concerns that impede model de-
velopment by creating synthetic data that can be shared across institutions. Researchers
created synthetic patients using a GAN based on actual patients in a systolic blood pres-
sure trial using GANs with diﬀerential privacy constraints. The synthetic patients were
similar enough to the original trial patients that models trained on each dataset yielded ef-
fectively the same results (111). Machine learning models trained using the synthetic data
generalized well to the original training data. Because sharing individual-level data across
clinical institutions often requires close collaboration and extensive data use agreements,
data augmentation and distribution of privacy-preserving synthetic data can circumvent
these restrictions.
Clinical task assistance. Generative models can assist with clinical tasks including
abnormality detection and modality translation in medical imaging (112). With regards to
abnormality detection, images from healthy patients are used to learn a latent space. Then,
a reference medical image potentially containing an abnormality is encoded into the healthy
latent space. Samples are drawn from the latent space near the encoded image and compared
against the reference medical image. Any diﬀerences between the generated samples and the
reference medical image are highlighted and analyzed for medical abnormalities (113, 114).
The task of translation of medical imaging between modalities — e.g., positron emission
tomography (PET) scan to computed tomography (CT) scan — is necessary for tasks like
attenuation correction of PET data using CT scans. Two diﬀerent encoders are learned
14
Chen et al.

for two medical imaging modalities with the same latent space. Then, one image can be
translated into another modality by mapping ﬁrst to the latent space and then decoding to
the second modality (115).
Drug development.
Currently the development of de novo drug-like compounds
relies on the identiﬁcation of new molecular entities. While prior methods have relied on
manual selection of candidates or molecular predictors to estimate viability, sampling from
generative models can create large virtual chemical libraries, which can then be screened
more eﬃciently for in silico drug discovery purposes.
Methods for candidate generation focus on use cases that are goal-based or distribution-
based (116). Goal-based describes methods that generate molecular structures that perform
well according to a scoped goal like structural or physiochemical features, and they do not
necessarily rely on probabilistic models.
Distribution-based methods observe acceptable
molecules and generate similar molecular structures, a task well-suited for generative mod-
els. Using GANs, researchers have produced novel small-molecule organicestructures (117).
However, molecules generated by GANs may lack diversity (118), a problem that other
generative models such as VAEs do not suﬀer (5). One model combines distribution-based
and goal-based approaches by learning a latent representation of molecules using a VAE
and then using reinforcement learning using a reward function, similar to the goal-based
scores, to explore the space (119).
6. REINFORCEMENT LEARNING FOR TREATMENT PLANNING
Sequential decision making is a core part of healthcare (120, 121, 122, 123, 7, 124, 125, 126),
and probabilistic models enable a variety of approaches including characterizing randomness
in patient disease progression and stochasticity of clinician intervention practices (6, 127,
120).
Consider a patient admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU) as they develop a
respiratory failure. Clinicians will attempt to manage the patient’s condition with a series
of advanced respiratory interventions over the coming hours/days with the goal of restoring
their function for a successful discharge and survival. During the ICU stay, a sequence of
interventions are done. For example, starting with a mechanical ventilation for urgent and
initial resuscitation of the patient, to prevent further deterioration. After this is normalized,
further interventions like more therapeutic treatments and additional diﬀerential diagnosis
follow.
This is an example of clinical care that is a series of interventions to improve
the chances of patient survival. Similarly, treating progression of chronic conditions is a
sequential set of interventions to manage disease severity, just over months/years of disease
progression. In machine learning, the closest analogue to modeling this problem is known as
Reinforcement learning (RL). The primary goal of an RL algorithm can be to either learn
a function or a distribution over possible interventions given patient state (policy learning)
or evaluating the potential reward of an existing policy (policy evaluation).
RL can be seen as a generalization of supervised machine learning learning where the
goal is to make a sequence of optimal decisions to maximize long term rewards (126) (patient
survival in the ICU example). In this setup, a clinician (learning agent) interacts within
an environment (patients) via actions (ventilation and other interventions) it performs,
observes the changes in the environment (patient state) in order to successfully discharge
the patient (maximize a longer term numerical reward) (128).
Reinforcement
learning: The study
of learning a
distribution over
interventions for
treatment planning
Rewards: A
measurement of
value of decisions
taken (e.g. patient
survival)
Actions: The set of
interventions
State: The collection
of patient traits that
can inform the next
action
Policy: The
distribution over
interventions given
the patient state
www.annualreviews.org • Probabilistic machine learning for Healthcare
15

Stochasticity of state transitions
Partial observability
Stochastic Policies
ventilation
medication
medication
ventilation
medication
No action
No action
..
ventilation
medication
Figure 5
Components of an RL based treatment planning model that should be modeled probabilistically.
Patient progression through a treatment plan is stochastic (blue distribution over state
transitions) with shades of blue representing possible states. A treatment plan or a policy itself,
learned from clinical data and stochastic clinical practice can lead to randomness in interventions
creating a distribution over potential interventions (e.g. a patient can be ventilated or given
medication or simply be monitored for longer–no-action). This resulting distribution is denoted as
a discrete distribution over interventions on the top-right where the shades of red denote the type
of intervention. Finally, many aspects of a patient may be unobserved (green+blue shaded
patients represent unobserved patient states in green) but critical to treatment planning.
Modeling this partial observability (the green distribution denotes this randomness) is beneﬁcial
for policy learning.
6.1. Model-based RL
Canonical RL assumes the ability to conduct experiments in the target environment, which
allows the learning algorithm to collect samples to learn a reasonable policy, called “model-
free” learning, explored for diabetes management (129) and sepsis management (130, 7).
In model-free learning, an RL agent does not model the underlying transition dynamics
of the data, which are how a patient state changes based on their current state and the
current intervention performed by the clinician. In healthcare, it is not feasible to conduct
online experiments, due to ethical concerns around patient safety, neither is it easy to
collect vast amounts of data. Embedding prior knowledge about transition dynamics is
therefore key in healthcare and can reduce the need to collect many samples. This is usually
done via “model-based” RL, which involves explicitly modeling the transition dynamics to
learn a policy. For example, consider the problem of managing type-1 diabetes, where the
goal would be to determine amount of insulin to administer based on continuous glucose
monitoring (6). While the underlying physiological glucagon kinetics and secretion are well
characterized (131), carbohydrate intake of a patient is stochastic (6).
This makes the
transition dynamics of the patient’s glucose model partially stochastic (132) and should be
modeled accordingly for healthcare RL tasks.
6.2. Stochastic Policies
Clinical data is rife with diﬀerent forms of uncertainty.
The nature of uncertainty can
be due to noisy or even incomplete observations of patient state. In Section 3.4, we fo-
cused on capturing uncertainty for predictive and diagnostics tasks.
Here, we focus on
16
Chen et al.

how uncertainty should be accounted for treatment planning in sequential decision making.
First, there is inherent randomness in how patients are treated as well as in healthcare
data-collection. For example, dosages can diﬀer across hospital practices; so can reporting
standards and practices (133, 134). There may also be some uncertainty between when a
drug was administered versus when the intervention was recorded. Modeling policies deter-
ministically can then lead to misspeciﬁcation in RL problem formulation. In the extreme
case where data-collection and recording artefacts are modeled without any wiggle room to
model the randomness, one runs the risk of blind imitation of such artefacts rather than
learning clinically meaningful treatment policies.
Most RL methods (policy learning or evaluation) in healthcare fall in the framework
of oﬀ-policy RL. Oﬀ-policy learning refers to policy learning when observational data on
patient progression and interventions are available from a clinician’s treatment path, called
the behavior policy. The goal is to either learn a better policy or estimate the reward of a
diﬀerent policy on these patients. Oﬀ-policy means the algorithm is unable to interact with
the environment (patients) to collect new samples. Here again one of the main statistical
challenge is sample eﬃciency to learn a better policy.
Along with modeling the transition dynamics, the inability to collect additional data (by
actively intervening on patients) can be mitigated by framing oﬀ-policy learning as a causal
(and therefore a probabilistic) estimation problem: would the patient have survived had
they not been treated? This framing allows the RL algorithm to explore how outcomes could
have changed under a slightly diﬀerent set of interventions without actual experimentation.
Another way to address this is if a similar patient happened to be in the dataset who was
not treated and one could similarly estimate a good treatment policy based on the estimated
eﬃcacy of the treatment. Causal modeling oﬀers an in-between solution, where by making
certain assumptions on the underlying probabilistic data-generating mechanisms, one could
sample such counterfactual trajectories from the original observed data itself (135). Thus,
with fewer eﬀective number of samples, reliable stochastic policies can be learned with a
probabilistic approach to RL. In healthcare, the beneﬁts of causal probabilistic modeling
have become a complementary toolbox that can be leveraged for training reliable policies.
6.3. Partial Observability
In many cases, clinicians’ interventions are done with more implicit information than avail-
able to an RL algorithm. This problem is known as partial observability and is yet another
source of uncertainty in reliable policy learning. The conventional MDP framework can
be augmented to handle partial observability, known as Partially Observable MDPs. The
added modeling complexity now involves learning an observation function p(o|s), which
characterizes likely observations o an RL algorithm perceives based on the potential states
s of the patient. Confounding in observational health data is one such example source of
partial observability (133). Consider a case where socio-economic status is unavailable to an
RL agent to learn from but was used by clinicians, who may have used costlier treatments
for wealthy patients. The goal is then to learn a policy when a behavior policy operated
on more (and complete state information) compared to what is available to the RL algo-
rithm. In this case, learning with partial observations involves estimating the posterior over
unobserved states p(s|·) (136, 137). The beneﬁts of such probabilistic inference have been
demonstrated for oﬀ-policy evaluation in the presence of such confounding for treatment
planning (137).
www.annualreviews.org • Probabilistic machine learning for Healthcare
17

7. DISCUSSION
Machine learning for healthcare holds promise to reshape healthcare. In this review, we give
a broad overview of the role that probabilistic modeling plays in medicine. This review does
not touch on all of the areas of healthcare that beneﬁt from probabilistic modeling. For
example, causal inference (138) is a central question in medicine. Probabilistic methods have
been used to estimate causal eﬀects in HIV treatment (139), and in general, probabilistic
techniques have been shown to give some of the most accurate inferences at a well-known
causal inference challenge (140). As another example, healthcare often involves time-series
data, which beneﬁts from a probabilistic approach for providing uncertainty estimates over
forecasts (141).
We believe that a probabilistic perspective can yield signiﬁcant beneﬁts when building
machine learning models for healthcare; this review covers speciﬁc examples in building
predictive models, phenotyping, sample generation, and learning policies. We encourage
further research into both methodologies and applications with probabilistic machine learn-
ing models in healthcare.
DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
The authors are not aware of any aﬃliations, memberships, funding, or ﬁnancial holdings
that might be perceived as aﬀecting the objectivity of this review.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors thank No´emie Elhadad, Rahul G. Krishnan, Peter Schulam, and Pete Szolovits
for helpful and useful feedback. This work was supported in part by a CIFAR AI Chair at
the Vector Institute (MG) and Microsoft Research (MG).
LITERATURE CITED
1. S. R. Steinhubl, E. D. Muse, and E. J. Topol, “Can mobile health technologies transform
health care?,” Jama, vol. 310, no. 22, pp. 2395–2396, 2013.
2. R. Poplin, A. V. Varadarajan, K. Blumer, Y. Liu, M. V. McConnell, G. S. Corrado, L. Peng,
and D. R. Webster, “Prediction of cardiovascular risk factors from retinal fundus photographs
via deep learning,” Nature Biomedical Engineering, vol. 2, no. 3, p. 158, 2018.
3. S. Nemati, A. Holder, F. Razmi, M. D. Stanley, G. D. Cliﬀord, and T. G. Buchman, “An
interpretable machine learning model for accurate prediction of sepsis in the icu,” Critical
care medicine, vol. 46, no. 4, p. 547, 2018.
4. R. Pivovarov and N. Elhadad, “Automated methods for the summarization of electronic health
records,” Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association, vol. 22, no. 5, pp. 938–
947, 2015.
5. M. H. Segler, T. Kogej, C. Tyrchan, and M. P. Waller, “Generating focused molecule libraries
for drug discovery with recurrent neural networks,” ACS central science, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 120–
131, 2018.
6. I. Fox, J. Lee, R. Busui, and J. Wiens, “Deep reinforcement learning for closed-loop blood
glucose control,” 2020.
7. M. Komorowski, A. Gordon, L. Celi, and A. Faisal, “A markov decision process to suggest
optimal treatment of severe infections in intensive care,” in Neural Information Processing
Systems Workshop on Machine Learning for Health, 2016.
18
Chen et al.

8. J. V. Dillon, I. Langmore, D. Tran, E. Brevdo, S. Vasudevan, D. Moore, B. Patton, A. Alemi,
M. Hoﬀman, and R. A. Saurous, “Tensorﬂow distributions,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.10604,
2017.
9. E. Bingham, J. P. Chen, M. Jankowiak, F. Obermeyer, N. Pradhan, T. Karaletsos, R. Singh,
P. Szerlip, P. Horsfall, and N. D. Goodman, “Pyro: Deep universal probabilistic program-
ming,” The Journal of Machine Learning Research, vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 973–978, 2019.
10. X. Miscouridou, A. Perotte, N. Elhadad, and R. Ranganath, “Deep survival analysis: Non-
parametrics and missingness,” in Machine Learning for Healthcare Conference, pp. 244–256,
2018.
11. Z. Che, S. Purushotham, K. Cho, D. Sontag, and Y. Liu, “Recurrent neural networks for
multivariate time series with missing values,” Scientiﬁc reports, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 1–12, 2018.
12. R. Ranganath, A. Perotte, N. Elhadad, and D. Blei, “Deep survival analysis,” in Machine
Learning for Healthcare Conference, pp. 101–114, 2016.
13. I. R. White, P. Royston, and A. M. Wood, “Multiple imputation using chained equations:
issues and guidance for practice,” Statistics in medicine, vol. 30, no. 4, pp. 377–399, 2011.
14. R. J. Little and D. B. Rubin, Statistical analysis with missing data, vol. 793. John Wiley &
Sons, 2019.
15. Y. Zhao and M. Udell, “Missing value imputation for mixed data through gaussian copula,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.12845, 2019.
16. K. Mohan and J. Pearl, “Graphical models for processing missing data,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1801.03583, 2018.
17. M. Sadinle and J. P. Reiter, “Sequentially additive nonignorable missing data modelling using
auxiliary marginal information,” Biometrika, vol. 106, no. 4, pp. 889–911, 2019.
18. B. Sun, L. Liu, W. Miao, K. Wirth, J. Robins, and E. J. T. Tchetgen, “Semiparametric
estimation with data missing not at random using an instrumental variable,” Statistica Sinica,
vol. 28, no. 4, pp. 1965–1983, 2018.
19. J. HYDE, “Testing survival under right censoring and left truncation,” Biometrika, vol. 64,
1977.
20. C. Lee, W. R. Zame, J. Yoon, and M. van der Schaar, “Deephit: A deep learning approach to
survival analysis with competing risks.,” in AAAI, pp. 2314–2321, 2018.
21. J. L. Katzman, U. Shaham, A. Cloninger, J. Bates, T. Jiang, and Y. Kluger, “Deepsurv:
personalized treatment recommender system using a cox proportional hazards deep neural
network,” BMC medical research methodology, vol. 18, no. 1, p. 24, 2018.
22. G. W. Brier, “Veriﬁcation of forecasts expressed in terms of probability,” Monthly weather
review, vol. 78, no. 1, pp. 1–3, 1950.
23. H. Ishwaran, U. B. Kogalur, E. H. Blackstone, M. S. Lauer, et al., “Random survival forests,”
The annals of applied statistics, vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 841–860, 2008.
24. W. Nelson, “Hazard plotting for incomplete failure data,” Journal of Quality Technology,
vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 27–52, 1969.
25. K.-M. Leung, R. M. Elashoﬀ, and A. A. Aﬁﬁ, “Censoring issues in survival analysis,” Annual
review of public health, vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 83–104, 1997.
26. H. Cho, N. P. Jewell, and M. R. Kosorok, “Interval censored recursive forests,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1912.09983, 2019.
27. P. W. Wilson, R. B. DAgostino, D. Levy, A. M. Belanger, H. Silbershatz, and W. B. Kannel,
“Prediction of coronary heart disease using risk factor categories,” Circulation, vol. 97, no. 18,
pp. 1837–1847, 1998.
28. C. Guo, G. Pleiss, Y. Sun, and K. Q. Weinberger, “On calibration of modern neural networks,”
in International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1321–1330, 2017.
29. S. R. Pfohl, T. Duan, D. Y. Ding, and N. H. Shah, “Counterfactual reasoning for fair clinical
risk prediction,” in Machine Learning for Healthcare Conference, pp. 325–358, 2019.
30. B. Van Calster, D. J. McLernon, M. Van Smeden, L. Wynants, and E. W. Steyerberg, “Cal-
www.annualreviews.org • Probabilistic machine learning for Healthcare
19

ibration: the achilles heel of predictive analytics,” BMC medicine, vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 1–7,
2019.
31. M. P. Naeini, G. Cooper, and M. Hauskrecht, “Obtaining well calibrated probabilities using
bayesian binning,” in Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 2015.
32. J. C. Platt, “Probabilistic outputs for support vector machines and comparisons to regularized
likelihood methods,” in ADVANCES IN LARGE MARGIN CLASSIFIERS, pp. 61–74, MIT
Press, 1999.
33. N. Chakravarti, “Isotonic median regression: a linear programming approach,” Mathematics
of operations research, vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 303–308, 1989.
34. B. Zadrozny and C. Elkan, “Transforming classiﬁer scores into accurate multiclass probability
estimates,” in Proceedings of the eighth ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge
discovery and data mining, pp. 694–699, 2002.
35. B. Zadrozny, “Reducing multiclass to binary by coupling probability estimates,” in Advances
in neural information processing systems, pp. 1041–1048, 2002.
36. A. Kumar, P. S. Liang, and T. Ma, “Veriﬁed uncertainty calibration,” in Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, pp. 3792–3803, 2019.
37. M. Raghu, K. Blumer, R. Sayres, Z. Obermeyer, B. Kleinberg, S. Mullainathan, and J. Klein-
berg, “Direct uncertainty prediction for medical second opinions,” in International Conference
on Machine Learning, pp. 5281–5290, 2019.
38. N. G. De Bruijn, Asymptotic methods in analysis, vol. 4. Courier Corporation, 1981.
39. B. Efron and G. Gong, “A leisurely look at the bootstrap, the jackknife, and cross-validation,”
The American Statistician, vol. 37, no. 1, pp. 36–48, 1983.
40. B. Lakshminarayanan, A. Pritzel, and C. Blundell, “Simple and scalable predictive uncertainty
estimation using deep ensembles,” in Advances in neural information processing systems,
pp. 6402–6413, 2017.
41. Y. Gal, “Uncertainty in deep learning,” University of Cambridge, vol. 1, p. 3, 2016.
42. Y. Gal and Z. Ghahramani, “Dropout as a bayesian approximation:
Representing model
uncertainty in deep learning,” in international conference on machine learning, pp. 1050–
1059, 2016.
43. P. Gr¨unwald, T. Van Ommen, et al., “Inconsistency of bayesian inference for misspeciﬁed
linear models, and a proposal for repairing it,” Bayesian Analysis, vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 1069–
1103, 2017.
44. M. W. Dusenberry, D. Tran, E. Choi, J. Kemp, J. Nixon, G. Jerfel, K. Heller, and A. M. Dai,
“Analyzing the role of model uncertainty for electronic health records,” in Proceedings of the
ACM Conference on Health, Inference, and Learning, pp. 204–213, 2020.
45. J. R. Zech, M. A. Badgeley, M. Liu, A. B. Costa, J. J. Titano, and E. K. Oermann, “Variable
generalization performance of a deep learning model to detect pneumonia in chest radiographs:
a cross-sectional study,” PLoS medicine, vol. 15, no. 11, p. e1002683, 2018.
46. B. Nestor, M. McDermott, W. Boag, G. Berner, T. Naumann, M. C. Hughes, A. Golden-
berg, and M. Ghassemi, “Feature robustness in non-stationary health records: caveats to
deployable model performance in common clinical machine learning tasks,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1908.00690, 2019.
47. J. B. Croft, A. G. Wheaton, Y. Liu, F. Xu, H. Lu, K. A. Matthews, T. J. Cunningham,
Y. Wang, and J. B. Holt, “Urban-rural county and state diﬀerences in chronic obstructive
pulmonary diseaseunited states, 2015,” Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, vol. 67, no. 7,
p. 205, 2018.
48. P. Yang, G. Dumont, and J. M. Ansermino, “Adaptive change detection in heart rate trend
monitoring in anesthetized children,” IEEE transactions on biomedical engineering, vol. 53,
no. 11, pp. 2211–2219, 2006.
49. R. Malladi, G. P. Kalamangalam, and B. Aazhang, “Online bayesian change point detection
algorithms for segmentation of epileptic activity,” in 2013 Asilomar Conference on Signals,
20
Chen et al.

Systems and Computers, pp. 1833–1837, IEEE, 2013.
50. H. Shimodaira, “Improving predictive inference under covariate shift by weighting the log-
likelihood function,” Journal of statistical planning and inference, vol. 90, no. 2, pp. 227–244,
2000.
51. M. Sugiyama, B. Blankertz, M. Krauledat, G. Dornhege, and K.-R. M¨uller, “Importance-
weighted cross-validation for covariate shift,” in Joint Pattern Recognition Symposium,
pp. 354–363, Springer, 2006.
52. A. Subbaswamy and S. Saria, “From development to deployment: dataset shift, causality, and
shift-stable models in health ai,” Biostatistics, vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 345–352, 2020.
53. S. Thorsteinsdottir, P. W. Dickman, O. Landgren, C. Blimark, M. Hultcrantz, I. Turesson,
M. Bj¨orkholm, and S. Y. Kristinsson, “Dramatically improved survival in multiple myeloma
patients in the recent decade: Results from a swedish population-based study,” Haematologica,
vol. 103, no. 9, p. e412, 2018.
54. R. Caruana, Y. Lou, J. Gehrke, P. Koch, M. Sturm, and N. Elhadad, “Intelligible models for
healthcare: Predicting pneumonia risk and hospital 30-day readmission,” in Proceedings of
the 21th ACM SIGKDD international conference on knowledge discovery and data mining,
pp. 1721–1730, 2015.
55. P. Schulam and S. Saria, “Reliable decision support using counterfactual models,” in Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 1697–1708, 2017.
56. J. C. Perdomo, T. Zrnic, C. Mendler-D¨unner, and M. Hardt, “Performative prediction,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2002.06673, 2020.
57. L. Bottou, J. Peters, J. Qui˜nonero-Candela, D. X. Charles, D. M. Chickering, E. Portugaly,
D. Ray, P. Simard, and E. Snelson, “Counterfactual reasoning and learning systems: The
example of computational advertising,” The Journal of Machine Learning Research, vol. 14,
no. 1, pp. 3207–3260, 2013.
58. S. Milli, J. Miller, A. D. Dragan, and M. Hardt, “The social cost of strategic classiﬁcation,” in
Proceedings of the Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, pp. 230–239,
2019.
59. A. S. Adamson and A. Smith, “Machine learning and health care disparities in dermatology,”
JAMA dermatology, vol. 154, no. 11, pp. 1247–1248, 2018.
60. Z. Obermeyer, B. Powers, C. Vogeli, and S. Mullainathan, “Dissecting racial bias in an algo-
rithm used to manage the health of populations,” Science, vol. 366, no. 6464, pp. 447–453,
2019.
61. A. Rajkomar, M. Hardt, M. D. Howell, G. Corrado, and M. H. Chin, “Ensuring fairness in
machine learning to advance health equity,” Annals of internal medicine, vol. 169, no. 12,
pp. 866–872, 2018.
62. M. Hardt, E. Price, and N. Srebro, “Equality of opportunity in supervised learning,” in Ad-
vances in neural information processing systems, pp. 3315–3323, 2016.
63. C. Dwork, M. Hardt, T. Pitassi, O. Reingold, and R. Zemel, “Fairness through awareness,” in
Proceedings of the 3rd innovations in theoretical computer science conference, pp. 214–226,
2012.
64. R. Zemel, Y. Wu, K. Swersky, T. Pitassi, and C. Dwork, “Learning fair representations,” in
International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 325–333, 2013.
65. T. Bolukbasi, K.-W. Chang, J. Y. Zou, V. Saligrama, and A. T. Kalai, “Man is to computer
programmer as woman is to homemaker? debiasing word embeddings,” in Advances in neural
information processing systems, pp. 4349–4357, 2016.
66. A. Chouldechova, “Fair prediction with disparate impact: A study of bias in recidivism pre-
diction instruments,” Big data, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 153–163, 2017.
67. J. Kleinberg, S. Mullainathan, and M. Raghavan, “Inherent trade-oﬀs in the fair determination
of risk scores,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.05807, 2016.
68. H. Singh, R. Singh, V. Mhasawade, and R. Chunara, “Fair predictors under distribution shift,”
www.annualreviews.org • Probabilistic machine learning for Healthcare
21

arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.00677, 2019.
69. G. Pleiss, M. Raghavan, F. Wu, J. Kleinberg, and K. Q. Weinberger, “On fairness and cali-
bration,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 5680–5689, 2017.
70. C. Simoiu, S. Corbett-Davies, S. Goel, et al., “The problem of infra-marginality in outcome
tests for discrimination,” The Annals of Applied Statistics, vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 1193–1216, 2017.
71. ´U. H´ebert-Johnson, M. Kim, O. Reingold, and G. Rothblum, “Multicalibration: Calibra-
tion for the (computationally-identiﬁable) masses,” in International Conference on Machine
Learning, pp. 1939–1948, 2018.
72. A. Zink and S. Rose, “Fair regression for health care spending,” Biometrics.
73. Y. Bechavod and K. Ligett, “Learning fair classiﬁers: A regularization-inspired approach,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.00044, pp. 1733–1782, 2017.
74. M. B. Zafar, I. Valera, M. G. Rogriguez, and K. P. Gummadi, “Fairness constraints: Mecha-
nisms for fair classiﬁcation,” in Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 962–970, 2017.
75. I. Chen, F. D. Johansson, and D. Sontag, “Why is my classiﬁer discriminatory?,” in Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 3539–3550, 2018.
76. R. L. Richesson, W. E. Hammond, M. Nahm, D. Wixted, G. E. Simon, J. G. Robinson,
A. E. Bauck, D. Cifelli, M. M. Smerek, J. Dickerson, et al., “Electronic health records based
phenotyping in next-generation clinical trials: a perspective from the nih health care systems
collaboratory,” Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association, vol. 20, no. e2,
pp. e226–e231, 2013.
77. J. M. Banda, M. Seneviratne, T. Hernandez-Boussard, and N. H. Shah, “Advances in elec-
tronic phenotyping: from rule-based deﬁnitions to machine learning models,” Annual review
of biomedical data science, vol. 1, pp. 53–68, 2018.
78. A. M. Alaa and M. van der Schaar, “Attentive state-space modeling of disease progression,”
in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 11334–11344, 2019.
79. M. Ghassemi, M. Wu, M. Feng, L. A. Celi, P. Szolovits, and F. Doshi-Velez, “Understanding
vasopressor intervention and weaning: Risk prediction in a public heterogeneous clinical time
series database,” Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association, p. ocw138, 2016.
80. J. M. Banda, M. Seneviratne, T. Hernandez-Boussard, and N. H. Shah, “Advances in electronic
phenotyping: From rule-based deﬁnitions to machine learning models,” Annual Review of
Biomedical Data Science, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 53–68, 2018.
81. F. Doshi-Velez, Y. Ge, and I. Kohane, “Comorbidity clusters in autism spectrum disorders:
an electronic health record time-series analysis,” Pediatrics, vol. 133, no. 1, pp. e54–e63, 2014.
82. Y. Halpern, S. Horng, Y. Choi, and D. Sontag, “Electronic medical record phenotyping using
the anchor and learn framework,” Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association,
vol. 23, no. 4, pp. 731–740, 2016.
83. S. Yu, Y. Ma, J. Gronsbell, T. Cai, A. N. Ananthakrishnan, V. S. Gainer, S. E. Churchill,
P. Szolovits, S. N. Murphy, I. S. Kohane, et al., “Enabling phenotypic big data with phenorm,”
Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association, vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 54–60, 2018.
84. J. C. Kirby, P. Speltz, L. V. Rasmussen, M. Basford, O. Gottesman, P. L. Peissig, J. A.
Pacheco, G. Tromp, J. Pathak, D. S. Carrell, et al., “Phekb: a catalog and workﬂow for cre-
ating electronic phenotype algorithms for transportability,” Journal of the American Medical
Informatics Association, vol. 23, no. 6, pp. 1046–1052, 2016.
85. K. P. Liao, J. Sun, T. A. Cai, N. Link, C. Hong, J. Huang, J. E. Huﬀman, J. Gronsbell,
Y. Zhang, Y.-L. Ho, et al., “High-throughput multimodal automated phenotyping (map) with
application to phewas,” Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association, vol. 26,
no. 11, pp. 1255–1262, 2019.
86. Y. Zhang, T. Cai, S. Yu, K. Cho, C. Hong, J. Sun, J. Huang, Y.-L. Ho, A. N. Ananthakrishnan,
Z. Xia, et al., “High-throughput phenotyping with electronic medical record data using a
common semi-supervised approach (phecap),” Nature Protocols, vol. 14, no. 12, pp. 3426–
3444, 2019.
22
Chen et al.

87. M. Ghassemi, T. Naumann, P. Schulam, A. L. Beam, I. Y. Chen, and R. Ranganath, “Practical
guidance on artiﬁcial intelligence for health-care data,” The Lancet Digital Health, vol. 1, no. 4,
pp. e157–e159, 2019.
88. N. S. Greenspan, “Autism, evolution, and the inadequacy of spectrum,” Evolution, medicine,
and public health, vol. 2018, no. 1, pp. 213–216, 2018.
89. R. Pivovarov, A. J. Perotte, E. Grave, J. Angiolillo, C. H. Wiggins, and N. Elhadad, “Learning
probabilistic phenotypes from heterogeneous ehr data,” Journal of biomedical informatics,
vol. 58, pp. 156–165, 2015.
90. J. S. Hirsch, J. S. Tanenbaum, S. Lipsky Gorman, C. Liu, E. Schmitz, D. Hashorva, A. Ervits,
D. Vawdrey, M. Sturm, and N. Elhadad, “Harvest, a longitudinal patient record summarizer,”
Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association, vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 263–274, 2015.
91. D. P. Kingma and M. Welling, “Auto-encoding variational bayes,” The 2nd International
Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2013.
92. E. Pierson, P. W. Koh, T. Hashimoto, D. Koller, J. Leskovec, N. Eriksson, and P. Liang,
“Inferring multidimensional rates of aging from cross-sectional data,” Proceedings of machine
learning research, vol. 89, p. 97, 2019.
93. J. Henderson, H. He, B. A. Malin, J. C. Denny, A. N. Kho, J. Ghosh, and J. C. Ho, “Phe-
notyping through semi-supervised tensor factorization (psst),” in AMIA Annual Symposium
Proceedings, vol. 2018, p. 564, American Medical Informatics Association, 2018.
94. D. C. Belgrave, A. Custovic, and A. Simpson, “Characterizing wheeze phenotypes to identify
endotypes of childhood asthma, and the implications for future management,” Expert review
of clinical immunology, vol. 9, no. 10, pp. 921–936, 2013.
95. M. Deliu, D. Belgrave, M. Sperrin, I. Buchan, and A. Custovic, “Asthma phenotypes in
childhood,” Expert review of clinical immunology, vol. 13, no. 7, pp. 705–713, 2017.
96. G. Hripcsak, P. B. Ryan, J. D. Duke, N. H. Shah, R. W. Park, V. Huser, M. A. Suchard,
M. J. Schuemie, F. J. DeFalco, A. Perotte, et al., “Characterizing treatment pathways at scale
using the ohdsi network,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, vol. 113, no. 27,
pp. 7329–7336, 2016.
97. I. Urteaga, M. McKillop, and N. Elhadad, “Learning endometriosis phenotypes from patient-
generated data,” NPJ digital medicine, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 1–14, 2020.
98. P. Schulam, F. Wigley, and S. Saria, “Clustering longitudinal clinical marker trajectories from
electronic health data: Applications to phenotyping and endotype discovery,” in Twenty-Ninth
AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 2015.
99. M. Ghassemi, M. Wu, M. C. Hughes, P. Szolovits, and F. Doshi-Velez, “Predicting intervention
onset in the icu with switching state space models,” AMIA Summits on Translational Science
Proceedings, vol. 2017, p. 82, 2017.
100. H. Suresh, P. Szolovits, and M. Ghassemi, “The use of autoencoders for discovering patient
phenotypes,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.07004, 2017.
101. H. Suresh, N. Hunt, A. Johnson, L. A. Celi, P. Szolovits, and M. Ghassemi, “Clinical inter-
vention prediction and understanding with deep neural networks,” in Machine Learning for
Healthcare Conference, pp. 322–337, 2017.
102. G. H. Chen and J. C. Weiss, “Survival-supervised topic modeling with anchor words: Char-
acterizing pancreatitis outcomes,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.00535, 2017.
103. V. A. Rodriguez and A. Perotte, “Phenotype inference with semi-supervised mixed member-
ship models,” Proceedings of machine learning research, vol. 106, p. 304, 2019.
104. I. Goodfellow, J. Pouget-Abadie, M. Mirza, B. Xu, D. Warde-Farley, S. Ozair, A. Courville,
and Y. Bengio, “Generative adversarial nets,” in Advances in neural information processing
systems, pp. 2672–2680, 2014.
105. D. Rezende and S. Mohamed, “Variational inference with normalizing ﬂows,” in International
Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1530–1538, 2015.
106. C. Shorten and T. M. Khoshgoftaar, “A survey on image data augmentation for deep learning,”
www.annualreviews.org • Probabilistic machine learning for Healthcare
23

Journal of Big Data, vol. 6, no. 1, p. 60, 2019.
107. M. Frid-Adar, I. Diamant, E. Klang, M. Amitai, J. Goldberger, and H. Greenspan, “Gan-
based synthetic medical image augmentation for increased cnn performance in liver lesion
classiﬁcation,” Neurocomputing, vol. 321, pp. 321–331, 2018.
108. A. Gupta, S. Venkatesh, S. Chopra, and C. Ledig, “Generative image translation for data
augmentation of bone lesion pathology,” in International Conference on Medical Imaging
with Deep Learning, pp. 225–235, 2019.
109. C. Han, K. Murao, T. Noguchi, Y. Kawata, F. Uchiyama, L. Rundo, H. Nakayama, and
S. Satoh, “Learning more with less: Conditional pggan-based data augmentation for brain
metastases detection using highly-rough annotation on mr images,” in Proceedings of the 28th
ACM International Conference on Information and Knowledge Management, pp. 119–127,
2019.
110. O. Bailo, D. Ham, and Y. Min Shin, “Red blood cell image generation for data augmentation
using conditional generative adversarial networks,” in Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops, pp. 0–0, 2019.
111. B. K. Beaulieu-Jones, Z. S. Wu, C. Williams, R. Lee, S. P. Bhavnani, J. B. Byrd, and C. S.
Greene, “Privacy-preserving generative deep neural networks support clinical data sharing,”
Circulation: Cardiovascular Quality and Outcomes, vol. 12, no. 7, p. e005122, 2019.
112. S. Kazeminia, C. Baur, A. Kuijper, B. van Ginneken, N. Navab, S. Albarqouni, and
A. Mukhopadhyay, “Gans for medical image analysis,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.06222, 2018.
113. X. Chen, N. Pawlowski, M. Rajchl, B. Glocker, and E. Konukoglu, “Deep generative models in
the real-world: An open challenge from medical imaging,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.05452,
2018.
114. C. F. Baumgartner, L. M. Koch, K. Can Tezcan, J. Xi Ang, and E. Konukoglu, “Visual feature
attribution using wasserstein gans,” in Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 8309–8319, 2018.
115. K. Armanious, C. Jiang, M. Fischer, T. K¨ustner, T. Hepp, K. Nikolaou, S. Gatidis, and
B. Yang, “Medgan: Medical image translation using gans,” Computerized Medical Imaging
and Graphics, vol. 79, p. 101684, 2020.
116. N. Brown, M. Fiscato, M. H. Segler, and A. C. Vaucher, “Guacamol: benchmarking models
for de novo molecular design,” Journal of chemical information and modeling, vol. 59, no. 3,
pp. 1096–1108, 2019.
117. E. Putin, A. Asadulaev, Q. Vanhaelen, Y. Ivanenkov, A. V. Aladinskaya, A. Aliper, and
A. Zhavoronkov, “Adversarial threshold neural computer for molecular de novo design,” Molec-
ular pharmaceutics, vol. 15, no. 10, pp. 4386–4397, 2018.
118. K. Preuer, P. Renz, T. Unterthiner, S. Hochreiter, and G. Klambauer, “Fr´echet chemnet
distance: a metric for generative models for molecules in drug discovery,” Journal of chemical
information and modeling, vol. 58, no. 9, pp. 1736–1741, 2018.
119. A. Zhavoronkov, Y. A. Ivanenkov, A. Aliper, M. S. Veselov, V. A. Aladinskiy, A. V. Aladin-
skaya, V. A. Terentiev, D. A. Polykovskiy, M. D. Kuznetsov, A. Asadulaev, et al., “Deep
learning enables rapid identiﬁcation of potent ddr1 kinase inhibitors,” Nature biotechnology,
vol. 37, no. 9, pp. 1038–1040, 2019.
120. J. Futoma, M. C. Hughes, and F. Doshi-Velez, “Popcorn: Partially observed prediction con-
strained reinforcement learning,” The 23rd International Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence
and Statistics, 2020.
121. S. M. Shortreed, E. Laber, D. J. Lizotte, T. S. Stroup, J. Pineau, and S. A. Murphy, “Inform-
ing sequential clinical decision-making through reinforcement learning: an empirical study,”
Machine learning, vol. 84, no. 1-2, pp. 109–136, 2011.
122. C.-H. Chang, M. Mai, and A. Goldenberg, “Dynamic measurement scheduling for event fore-
casting using deep rl,” in International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 951–960, 2019.
123. N. Prasad, L.-F. Cheng, C. Chivers, M. Draugelis, and B. E. Engelhardt, “A reinforcement
24
Chen et al.

learning approach to weaning of mechanical ventilation in intensive care units,” Uncertainty
in Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 2017.
124. J. D. Mart´ın-Guerrero, F. Gomez, E. Soria-Olivas, J. Schmidhuber, M. Climente-Mart´ı, and
N. V. Jim´enez-Torres, “A reinforcement learning approach for individualizing erythropoietin
dosages in hemodialysis patients,” Expert Systems with Applications, vol. 36, no. 6, pp. 9737–
9742, 2009.
125. L. Li, M. Komorowski, and A. A. Faisal, “The actor search tree critic (astc) for oﬀ-policy
pomdp learning in medical decision making,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.11548, 2018.
126. C. Yu, J. Liu, and S. Nemati, “Reinforcement learning in healthcare: a survey,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1908.08796, 2019.
127. O. Gottesman, F. Johansson, M. Komorowski, A. Faisal, D. Sontag, F. Doshi-Velez, and L. A.
Celi, “Guidelines for reinforcement learning in healthcare,” Nat Med, vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 16–18,
2019.
128. R. S. Sutton and A. G. Barto, Reinforcement learning: An introduction. MIT press, 2018.
129. M. O. M. Javad, S. O. Agboola, K. Jethwani, A. Zeid, and S. Kamarthi, “A reinforcement
learning–based method for management of type 1 diabetes: Exploratory study,” JMIR dia-
betes, vol. 4, no. 3, p. e12905, 2019.
130. A. Raghu, M. Komorowski, L. A. Celi, P. Szolovits, and M. Ghassemi, “Continuous state-space
models for optimal sepsis treatment: a deep reinforcement learning approach,” in Machine
Learning for Healthcare Conference, pp. 147–163, 2017.
131. C. D. Man, F. Micheletto, D. Lv, M. Breton, B. Kovatchev, and C. Cobelli, “The uva/padova
type 1 diabetes simulator: new features,” Journal of diabetes science and technology, vol. 8,
no. 1, pp. 26–34, 2014.
132. J. A. Harris and F. G. Benedict, A biometric study of basal metabolism in man. No. 279,
Carnegie institution of Washington, 1919.
133. O. Gottesman, F. Johansson, M. Komorowski, A. Faisal, D. Sontag, F. Doshi-Velez, and L. A.
Celi, “Guidelines for reinforcement learning in healthcare,” Nat Med, vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 16–18,
2019.
134. J. Van Parys, “Variation in physician practice styles within and across emergency depart-
ments,” PloS one, vol. 11, no. 8, p. e0159882, 2016.
135. M. Oberst and D. Sontag, “Counterfactual oﬀ-policy evaluation with gumbel-max structural
causal models,” in International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 4881–4890, 2019.
136. B. Sallans, “Learning factored representations for partially observable markov decision pro-
cesses,” in Advances in neural information processing systems, pp. 1050–1056, 2000.
137. G. Tennenholtz, S. Mannor, and U. Shalit, “Oﬀ-policy evaluation in partially observable en-
vironments,” Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, pp. 10276–10283,
2019.
138. M. A. Hern´an and J. M. Robins, “Causal inference,” 2020.
139. L. E. Cain, J. M. Robins, E. Lanoy, R. Logan, D. Costagliola, and M. A. Hern´an, “When to
start treatment? a systematic approach to the comparison of dynamic regimes using observa-
tional data,” The international journal of biostatistics, vol. 6, no. 2, 2010.
140. V. Dorie, J. Hill, U. Shalit, M. Scott, D. Cervone, et al., “Automated versus do-it-yourself
methods for causal inference: Lessons learned from a data analysis competition,” Statistical
Science, vol. 34, no. 1, pp. 43–68, 2019.
141. R. G. Krishnan, U. Shalit, and D. Sontag, “Structured inference networks for nonlinear state
space models,” in AAAI, 2017.
www.annualreviews.org • Probabilistic machine learning for Healthcare
25